1
Carpe Diem in our backyard
We live in a world of infinite aspirations and
finite resources. Imagine being confronted
with a choice between giving a part of your
money to benefit a community in a distant
corner of the world, or donating it to crime
prevention in your hometown. What would you
chose? Now, imagine having the choice
between consumption today to maximise your
utility, and foregoing that urge in order to
benefit some generations in the future. What
would your decision be?
In the first scenario, most individuals,
organizations, and governments would choose
the latter. That is because the local donation
provides a direct incentive – the more money
donated to crime prevention in your area, the
safer and more harmonious your hometown
may be. This direct benefit to the local donor
makes extensive charity abroad irrational in
the context of limited funds. That is why
international aid has always been limited.
The recent closure of the UK’s Department
for International Development in the midst of
a global pandemic by Boris Johnson has
been partly motivated by that reasoning, and
partly because caring about your own
backyard is more politically effective than
abstract notions of duty, altruism, or
responsibility.
In the second scenario, hard facts show a
clear picture of humanity’s choices: since
2010, 10 million hectares of forests have
been cut down globally each year, while
global CO2 emissions from fossil fuels alone
have exceeded 35 billion tonnes, up by 33
billion since 1900 (Ritchie, Roser; 2021).
Especially the Baby Boomer and Generation
X have contributed to environmental
degradation through their prosperous
consumerism, although we (Millennials) aren’t
much better. There is perhaps a reason
behind the mockery that we will never afford
to buy a house because of our avocado
toasts and overpriced coffee expenditures
(Levine, 2017).
#collaborativeadvantage
THOUGHT PROVOKING IDEAS OF THE
GLOBAL ESSAY COMPETITION 2022
Restructured Incentives: How Retirement
Pensions can Become a Mechanism to Guide
Environmentally Sustainable Decisions and
Contribute to Solving the Intergenerational
Conflict of Interests
Sophie Lara Neuber is one of the top three contributors to this year‘s
Global Essay Competition Award. She studies at University of Cambridge and
attended the 51st St. Gallen Symposium as a Leader of Tomorrow. 
2
Such clear preference for the present can be
partially explained by human’s survival and
self-preservation instincts, partly by the
‘carpe diem’ philosophy that flourishes in
turbulent times, and even by the corporate
finance theory of time-value of money, where
one dollar today is worth more than one dollar
tomorrow, and consequently consumption
now is more valuable than consumption in the
future.
The second dilemma was at the heart of the
COP26 negotiations in 2021, with least
developed countries asking whether
prioritising ecologically sustainable policies
will not hinder their industrialization process
and poverty alleviation efforts. Is it right to
prioritize ecologically sustainable
development, when still 9% of the world
population is living in extreme poverty (on
less than $1.90 a day) – a statistic some would
argue is not worth ‘sustaining’? More
generally, however, it is a dilemma between
generations. On one hand, present
generations have rational reasons to
consume today and make their life on Earth
as enjoyable while it lasts. On the other hand,
there is scientific evidence that doing so
jeopardizes the future generations’ ability to
lead healthy lives by destroying Earth’s
ecosystems in the process. Harry Truman
once asked for a one-handed economist,
because seeing both sides to the argument
complicates the solution. But it is the wellrounded understanding that allows us to
design constructive frameworks that might
lead to a win-win situation.
Contracts are not enough
The question about what should be written
into a new intergenerational contract
assumes that such a contract can resolve
the intergenerational conflict. A recent
increase in papers advocating for a new
intergenerational contract by leading
thinkers and NGOs also supports that
assumption. For example, The
Intergenerational Foundation, a UK-based
charity, advocates that an intergenerational
justice can be achieved if public policy is
formed from behind the Rawlsian ‘veil of
ignorance’. They arrive at two principles that
they claim will ensure intergenerational
justice: i) just savings, to improve the lot of
each future generation; and ii) just
distribution, to eliminate unfair inequalities
between living generations (Tozer, 2019).
Minouche Shafik, current Dean of the London
School of Economics, has also recently
published a book on the new social contract,
where she argues that it should be built upon
three key principles: i) security for all; ii)
maximum investment in capability; and iii)
efficient and fair sharing of risks. (Shafik,
2021). Without wanting to diminish the value
of those calls to action, it is quite easy to say
that we need to address large income
inequalities, or provide better security to all.
The pressing question is not ‘what’ but ‘how’,
and I am afraid contracts are not enough.
Legal contracts work only thanks to the power
of the threat of punishment (Smith, 1997). In
other words, in a situation where the cost of
abiding to a contract is larger than the benefit
of abiding to that contract, only the threat of
punishment stops people from breaking legal
agreements. In contrast, social contracts
work only when there is a general duty of
responsibility for others within society. If
grandparents feel no responsibility for their
grandchildren, or children for their parents,
then an effective welfare state that provides
security for all, or a just risk-sharing of
environmental impacts is very difficult to be
achieved.
For an intergenerational contract to be
enforced, younger generations must have the
ability to punish older ones who have
disadvantaged future generations through
their actions. That is impossible for two main
reasons. First, the young have a weaker
political power in democratic regimes due to
the changing demographics. In a political
system that functions under majority rule, the
young have increasingly less power as 
3
developed societies continue to age,
and fertility rates continue to fall.
Second, those who are responsible
for the largest environmental footprint
are either so rich and powerful that
they are ‘untouchable’ – like Jeff
Bezos2, or are dead by now – like
the leaders of the Industrial
Revolution in 1830s, and therefore
cannot be punished. With regards to
the prerequisites for the enforcement
of a social contract, the picture is
also rather bleak. Divorce rates in
the western world are at record
highs, diminishing the family-centric
structure of society (Roser, 2020).
Intra-national income inequalities are
at record highs, polarizing societies
(Stiglitz, 2012). Migration flows from
Middle East and Africa and in
Central America have also intensified
in recent years, fuelling the narrative
of ‘us’ versus ‘them’. Without a
deeply ingrained feeling of unity at
family level, social level, or national
level, the sense of responsibility is
absent, and so is a working social
contract.
Adam Smith in The Wealth of Nations argued
that human self-interest is the strongest force
that can be used for the common good: ‘It is
not from the benevolence of the butcher, the
brewer, or the baker, that we expect our
dinner, but from their regard to their own
interest. We address ourselves, not to their
humanity but to their self-love, and never talk
to them of our own necessities but of their
advantages.’ (Smith, 1776; ch.2) Even though
the invisible hand can be criticized for
unequally distributing free-market wealth, the
underlying concept explaining human
behaviour is relevant 250 years later:
incentives matter.
Incentives
One of the most direct ‘intergenerational
agreements’ that currently works is the
retirement pension scheme. People in the
labour force pay a percentage of their current
incomes into a pension programme, which
are directly redistributed to fund current
pensioners. In exchange, the contributors are
promised to receive their pensions after
retirement, funded by future generation of
workers. In simplistic terms, the value of the
pension (P) usually depends on the duration
of employment (t), salary (s), and risk the job
poses to one’s health (r).
Such a pension allocation mechanism does
not account for the environmental impact that
the individual has had over the course of their
employment. This is problematic for two
reasons: First, a person working in an
environmentally harmful but lucrative industry
(e.g. logging) will receive a higher pension
than a person working in an environmentallyconscious but less lucrative job (e.g. an
ocean-cleaning NGO). Thus, such pension
structure encourages the most lucrative
career choices, which to date have
unfortunately been positively correlated with
negative environmental impacts. Second, it is
unjust for the younger generations that
contribute their current earnings to pay for
that pension. In this case, the employed
young will contribute more money to the
pension of the logger, than that of the NGO
worker, even though the logger has directly
contributed to deforestation throughout his
career and indirectly to environmental
degradation that makes the young lives
harder, whereas the NGO workers work has
had the opposite impact.
Changing the way pensions are distributed
would change the incentives that inform
individuals employment choices, and would
make the funding of pensions less unjust for
younger workers.
Incentives in action: restructuring pensions
Greenhouse gas emissions tracking is
becoming an ESG requirement for
companies, driven by credit rating agencies,
investors, and customer preferences. As the
tracking technologies continue to improve,
GHG emissions should be used as a
fundamental indicator of environmental
impact of companies, and a lens through
which companies’ management teams can
be assessed and held accountable.
Such a formula for pensions distribution
would be fairer to the older generation
receiving pensions, as well as the younger
generation that funds them. On top of the
usual variables that determine how much a
person receives in their retirement pay-outs,
it would:
i. incentivise people to choose employers
who mitigate their negative environmental
impact;
ii. in case where an alternative choice is
impossible due to the skill level and necessity
of employment (e.g. bus drivers, cleaning
staff at oil companies), it would ensure that
lower-skilled workers, or those without a
decision-making role within the company are
not punished as much as the management,
but their GHG-related pension ‘discount’ is
adjusted for their position and earnings;
iii. put the financial burden in the form of
heavily ‘discounted’ retirement pensions on
the leadership of respective companies,
incentivising them to lead systemic change
that promotes environmental sustainability;
4
iv. satisfy the younger generations paying for
the pensions through their own work, by
introducing an element of environmental
equity, whereby retired individuals are
rewarded for their work adjusted for the
environmental side effects of their past
employment.
A counter-argument to the third point may be
that senior executives and C-suite managers
do not rely on pension pay-outs for their
retirement, but have amassed enough wealth
to live off capital gains on their stock-market
investments, real-estate, and other
accumulated assets. In that case, that
financial incentive to align their company’s
operations with environmental considerations
would be minimal, if non-existent. Whether
this is entirely true or not, this raises an
important point: one incentive is never
enough.
The above incentive structure should be
complemented by redesigned incentives not
just at an individual level, but at a business
level. For example, to motivate the executive
management of public companies, financial
valuation account for GHG emissions, and
companies’ market capitalization should be
adjusted accordingly. Such valuation
methods are starting to gain support in the
business world, as discussed by Sir Ronald
Cohen in his book ‘Impact’, and I am
confident that it is just a matter of time before
such GHG emissions adjustment practices
will become. Alternatively, the level of
corporate tax could also be a function of a
company’s GHG emissions. Opportunities to
restructure incentives are endless.
To take advantage of the power of incentives
in the ‘intergenerational agreement’ of
pensions schemes, I propose that the value
of the pension (p) was not just a function of
employment duration (t), salary (s), and health
risk (r), but also a function of net greenhouse
gas emissions (GHG) of a given company per
capita adjusted for the
seniority of that employee, proxied by the Gini
Coefficient (gI) . In short, 
5
Conclusion
To address the intergenerational conflict with
regards to climate change, as well as any
other conflicts of interest, it is crucial to
positively disrupt the way incentives are
structured. To achieve this, we must look
beyond formalized legal or even social
contracts, which often focus on the ‘what’ and
not necessarily on the ‘how’, and concentrate
on how to redesign incentives to encourage
sound decisions to allow for win-win
outcomes. Amendments to the pension
distribution formula are an example of how
incentives can guide older and younger
generations in a mutually beneficial direction.
By aligning financial incentives with goals of
environmental sustainability – a concern of the
young, the restructured incentives for
retirement pensions light up an energyefficient bulb in the tunnel.
6
References
Aruna, S., Santhi, P., 2015; Impulse Purchase Behaviour Among Generation-Y; SSRN: https://
ssrn.com/abstract=2805619
Cohen, R., 2021; Impact Rawls, J., 1973. A theory of justice., Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ritchie, H., Roser, M., 2020; CO2 and Greenhouse Gas Emissions; Our World in Data
Ritchie, H., Roser, M., 2021; Deforestation and Forest Loss; Our World in Data Shafik, M., 2021. What
we owe each other : a new social contract.
Smith, A., 1776; Wealth of Nations; bk. 1, ch. 2
Smith, S. A. 1997; Performance, Punishment and the Nature of Contractual Obligation. The Modern
Law Review, 60(3), 360–377. http://www.jstor.org/stable/1097241
Stiglitz, J.E., 2012. The price of inequality, The Guardian,
Levine, S., 2017; Millionaire tells millennials: if you want a house stop buying avocado toast; [last
accessed: 17.01.2022] https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/may/15/australianmillionaire-millennials-avocado-toast-house
The Guardian, 2015; Consumption dwarfs population as main environmental threat; Yale
Environment 360 Series; [last accessed: 17.01.2022] https://www.theguardian.com/
environment/2009/apr/15/consumption-versus-population-environmental-impact
Tozer, T., 2019; A New Intergenerational Contract: Intergenerational Justice and Policy. [last
accessed: 17.01.2022] https://www.futuregenerations.gi/uploads/docs/uk/A-New-IntergenerationalContract_defin.pdf