1
Introduction
Now more than ever, generational divides are
eroding the social contracts that have been the
framework of societal cohesion for centuries.
The culmination of record levels of societal
inequality, disruptions resulting from
globalization, and a planet undergoing climate
change has caused societal divides never
before experienced in living memory.
Unfortunately, much of the differences lie
between generations as the concerns and
priorities of different age demographics vary
greatly. For the Silent Generation and the Baby
Boomers, their main concerns involve planning
for retirement and anxieties about savings
(Tyson, 2021). In Canada, 77 percent of baby
boomers are worried about retirement (Wells,
2021). Conversely, for a majority of young
people, the most pressing challenge is climate
change. In fact, nearly 90 percent of Gen Z
youth are worried about the future of the
environment (Sustainable Brands, 2019).
Although the priorities of older and younger
generations vary greatly, there is a lever tying
together their priorities that could reignite
intergenerational cohesiveness: public
pensions.
Not only do public pensions represent one of
the largest classes of funds in terms of capital
– with over $50 trillion USD under management
– but their allocation structure is different than
other funds as well (OECD, 2021). Unlike private
funds or even employer-based funds which rely
on individuals contributing to their own
retirement, many public pensions rely on the
current labour force to fund the pensions of
retirees, just as the previous generation did
before them. The funding structure of pensions
thus increases the power of the current labour
workforce to impact the types of investments
the pension fund pursues.
#collaborativeadvantage
THOUGHT PROVOKING IDEAS OF THE
GLOBAL ESSAY COMPETITION 2022
The Role of Pensions to Form the Framework
of a New Intergenerational Contract
Anton Meier is one of the top three contributors to this year‘s
Global Essay Competition Award. He studies at University of Toronto and attended the
51st St. Gallen Symposium as a Leader of Tomorrow.
A Case for Pension Reform
In this essay, I present an argument for public
pension reform as a means to enhance
cooperation between age groups and reestablish a collective intergenerational
contract. In particular, I advocate for the
creation of a global forum to oversee pension
funds’ divestment from fossil fuel-emitting
companies and the re-allocation of capital to
net-zero companies by 2050. 
2
This ambitious target will help address the
challenge of mobilizing finance to sustainable
enterprises while tackling the long-term
investment concerns of carbon-emitting
companies. The longer time horizons also
allow for pensions to work with their portfolio
companies directly to eliminate their carbon
emissions, which helps address the route
sources of climate change. Younger
generations will be increasingly enthusiastic
about contributing to pension funds while
older generations can feel more secure about
the long-term viability of their pension plan.
There will also be a collective sense of pride
in public pensions serving as a lever to fund
sustainable enterprises and act as a catalyst
towards energy transition. Finally, the
transition to renewable investments could
trigger a spillover into private funds (private
equity and mutual funds) which have so far
been reluctant (Harry Bridges Center for
Labor Studies, 2021).
How the Proposed Reform Works
Public pensions today are facing numerous
challenges that are a result of major changes
in demographics. Across much of the
developed world, populations are ageing at
levels not seen previously. As average life
expectancies increase and birth rates
decrease, average ages continue
to increase. In Italy and Japan, the average
ages are now 47 and 48, respectively
(Worldometer, 2022). As more people enter
their retirement years, the size of the
workforce is anticipated to continue
shrinking. In the United States, for example,
there is already a shortage of 6 million
workers (Emsi, 2021). This trend can be seen
in other developed countries as well, which
will pose a major strain on the public pension
system of many countries.
A second major challenge with pensions
involves the long-term return on their
investments.
A second major challenge with
pensions involves the long-term return
on their investments. A study from
Imperial College’s Centre for Climate
Finance & Investment found that
investments in renewable sources
ofenergy saw returns of over 150
percent while investments in fossil fuels
saw losses over 20 percent (Imperial
College, 2020). This supports other
studies on the return on investment
(ROI) among renewable and nonrenewable energy sources from the UK,
which saw returns exceeding 75
percent for green energy compared to
9 percent for non-renewables (Vetter,
2019). With strains on pensions
expected to continue increasing, it is
imperative for pensions to deliver
strong and consistent levels of returns.
In this sense, divestment represents a
great way to ensure long-term stability.
Despite the climate and financial
incentives highlighting the importance of
transitioning away from carbon-intensive
investments, less than half (46 percent)
of pension plans in Europe consider
climate change to be a major
challenge (Flood, 2021). And only 8
percent have commitments to reach net
zero emissions by 2050 (Flood, 2021).
The lack of net-zero commitments
further exemplifies the differences in
priorities between the people managing
pension funds and those who will
experience the heaviest impacts of
climate change.
Current Challenges with Pensions
The proposed climate reform plan involves
the establishment of a global forum to
develop criteria for fossil fuel divestment and
net-zero targets. 
This body would be comprised of leading
climate scientists, representatives from the
United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCC) secretariat, the
United Nations Youth Delegate Programme
and executives from the largest public
pensions globally. Their fundamental mandate
would be to ensure that public pensions
around the world achieve net-zero emissions
by 2050. This means ensuring that the overall
activities in the value chain of a company have
no net impact on climate change (Science
Based Targets Initiative, 2021). The diverse
representation on the governing body would
signify the global nature of this challenge and
enable collaboration among pension plans.
The inclusion of the UN Youth Delegate
Programme would help ensure that the voices
of younger generations were expressed and
considered when decisions are made about
pension reform. Their participation would also
be a critical tool to help incentivize pensions
to participate, as it would show the intent for
pensions to consider future generations when
managing their portfolios.
Currently, one of the major challenges
inhibiting greater progress towards net-zero
investments is fear of losses on investment
returns. For example, if one pension were to
divest from an oil and gas company, there is
the risk that another pension or private fund
would reinvest in the same company. This
would not only fail to address the objective of
progress towards net zero but would also
deter pensions from engaging in climatefriendly practices in the future. By creating a
forum for public pensions to be transparent
about their divestment plans, the risk of reinvestment into fossil-fuel emitting companies
(or an exchange of ownership) would be
mitigated.
Another benefit of establishing an
international body is the knowledge-sharing
that would arise. Individual pensions that have
already committed to net-zero emissions by
3
2050 would be able to provide expertise and
support to other pensions looking to emulate
their climate ambitions. For example, in my
home country of Canada, four major pensions
(OMERS, Ontario Teachers’ Pension Plan,
Investment Management Corporation of
Ontario and Caisse de Dépôt) have already
committed to net-zero emissions by 2050
(Shift, 2021). In these cases, one of the key
drivers of divestment among Canadian funds
is the fiduciary responsibility of pension plans
to their beneficiaries to address climate
change (Shift, 2021). This follows the Supreme
Court of Canada’s recognition that pension
funds must consider the implications of
climate change (Macnab, 2021). Through the
global forum, investors can share their own
experiences with GHG divestment, along with
the impacts of national policies on their
decisions.
Another critical aspect of the proposed forum
is to prevent the greenwashing of climate
investments. Greenwashing refers to
misleading investors or the public about the
environmental sustainability of investments
(Kenton, 2021). Unfortunately, this trend has
become increasingly common among pension
plans as they look to portray themselves as
“climate-friendly” (Pollard, 2021). The rise of
ESG metrics has also resulted in some funds
"showing" that they are invested in climate
action without actually taking meaningful
measures to reduce emissions. Through the
establishment of a global forum, the criteria for
divestment would be clear and there would be
less opportunities for pension funds to
mislead investors and the public about the
climate response plans. And if they were
unable to reach the requirements from the
global forum or displayed no intent to meeting
commitments to net-zero plans, the fund
would be removed from the forum’s list of
participating pensions.
The climate impacts of a global forum to
oversee the emission-reduction programs of
pension funds would be significant. With over
$50 trillion USD managed by pension funds
globally, the re-allocation of capital would
significantly contribute to reaching the Paris
Agreement targets (OECD, 2021). Currently,
there is a major shortage of funding for
environmentally sustainable investments. For
example, among Canada’s largest pension
funds (some of whom have committed to netzero reductions), only seven percent of assets
are placed in sustainable investments
(Institute Smart Prosperity, 2021). With the
global share of investments in climatefriendly enterprises set to increase through
the forum, the necessary capital would be
mobilized to help scale up sustainable
enterprises.
The increase in capital directed to
sustainable investments would be especially
beneficial for renewable energy sources.
Currently, energy emissions account for over
60 percent of global carbon emissions
(Morgan Stanley, 2019). The same report
estimated that the capital required to fund
technologies that allow us to meet the Paris
Agreement goal of 1.5°C is approximately $50
trillion USD (Morgan Stanley, 2019). If pension
plans can collectively re-direct funds away
from energy-intensive sources towards
sustainable investments, there would be
enough capital in renewable energy sources
to meet the Paris Agreement targets. The
table below from IPCC contains a more
detailed breakdown of the sources of carbon
emissions.
4
An often-overlooked benefit of climate reform
to pension funds are the increased financial
returns resulting from a more sustainable
portfolio. Over the past few years, renewable
investments have greatly outperformed fossil
fuel investments. In 2021, investments in
renewable energies had seven times higher
returns then investments in fossil fuels
(Jackson, 2021). Part of the reason for
increased returns among renewable, cleantech investments is that many companies are
still in the earlier stages of development.
Unlike traditional oil and gas companies,
which are more mature investments with
lower expected returns, many clean-tech
companies are in the growth phase and offer
a higher potential ROI. Furthermore, what
many clean-tech companies need most is
funding to support scaling up. Pensions can
provide the necessary capital to help these
companies reach economies of scale.
As populations across much of the developed
world continue to age and pensions become
increasingly strained, it is imperative for these
funds to become more open to high-growth
opportunities. Traditional portfolios consisting
of mature asset classes will not provide the
long-term financial returns necessary to
guarantee payments to the growing number of
retirees who are increasingly living longer and
depending on expensive care services
(Ligaya, 2013). Not only will the global forum on
pension reform assist with the necessary
carbon reduction needed to meet the Paris
Agreement targets, but it will also support the
long-term financial sustainability of pensions.
Climate Impacts Financial Impacts
5
Spillover Effects
Over the past few years, pension funds have
become increasingly open to diversifying their
portfolios and investing more in
environmentally sustainable companies.
Unfortunately, this trend has yet to transfer to
private equity and mutual funds. Since 2010,
private equity funds have invested over $1
trillion USD into the energy sector, with nearly
90 percent of these investments directed into
fossil fuels (Tabuchi, 2021). What is especially
concerning is that a key driver of the uptick in
fossil fuel investments among private equities
is divestment in these companies from other
funds. Only by aligning global pension funds
and their cumulative $50 trillion USD to divest
from fossil-fuel companies will divestment
result in a substantial decrease in carbon
emissions. Otherwise, private equities will
continue to view these assets as undervalued
opportunities for large financial returns, at the
expense of climate change.
Although major obstacles need to be
addressed to incentivize pensions plans to
participate, including concerns about shortterm financial impacts, there is broad public
support for climate reform. In the United
Kingdom, nearly 75 percent of the population
is supportive of transitioning pension funds to
become more climate-friendly (Defined
Contribution Investment Forum, 2020). This
trend is consistent with other countries as
well. Should a global forum be successfully
implemented, it will not only represent an
opportunity for funds to re-direct the
necessary capital into climate-friendly
investments, but also offer greater long-term
returns. Pension plans will once again become
a source of cohesion between retirees and
the current labour force.
6
References
“Canadian Pensions Dashboard for Responsible Investing.” Institute Smart Prosperity,
November 2021. https://institute.smartprosperity.ca/sites/default/files/Pensions- Dashboard.pdf.
“Decarbonization: The Race to Zero Emissions.” Morgan Stanley, November 25, 2019.
https://www.morganstanley.com/ideas/investing-in-decarbonization.
“Demographic Drought.” Emsi, May 6, 2021.
https://www.economicmodeling.com/demographic-drought/.
“Energy Investing: Exploring Risk and Return in the Capital Markets.” Centre for Climate
Finance & Investment. Imperial College Business School, June 2020.
https://imperialcollegelondon.app.box.com/s/f1r832z4apqypw0fakk1k4ya5w30961g.
Flood, Chris. “Climate Change Drives Push for Greener Pensions.” Financial Times. Financial Times,
October 18, 2021. https://www.ft.com/content/e6f262d7-622a-4027-9a01- 136cb1d5c722.
“Gen Z Believes in Its Own Power to Make Change, but That Companies Must Lead the Way.”
Sustainable
Brands. Sustainable Brands, October 23, 2019.
https://sustainablebrands.com/read/marketing-and-comms/gen-z-believes-in-its-ownpower-to-make-change-but-that-companies-must-lead-the-way.
“Global Pension Statistics.” OECD. OECD, December 11, 2021.
https://www.oecd.org/daf/fin/private-pensions/globalpensionstatistics.htm.
Jackson, Felicia. “Global Renewables Investment Return 7 Times Higher than Fossil Fuels.” Forbes.
Forbes Magazine, March 26, 2021.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/feliciajackson/2021/03/19/global-renewables-investmentreturn-7-times-higher-than-fossil-fuels/?sh=12b33af723c0.
Kenton, Will. “What You Should Know about Greenwashing.” Investopedia. Investopedia, May 19,
2021.
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/g/greenwashing.asp.
“The Key to Unlocking Member Engagement.” Defined Contribution Investment Forum, July 2020.
https://dcif.co.uk/wp- content/uploads/2020/07/the_key_to_unlocking_member_engagement.pdf.
Ligaya, Armina. “Longer Life Expectancies Straining Retirees' Budgets.” CBCnews. CBC/Radio
Canada,
January 14, 2013. https://www.cbc.ca/news/business/taxes/longer-lifeexpectancies-straining-retirees-budgets-1.1362611.
Macnab, Aidan. “Pension Fund Trustees Obligated to Consider Climate Change Risk: Lawyer.”
Law Times. Law Times, June 4, 2021. https://www.lawtimesnews.com/practiceareas/environmental/pension-fund-trustees-obligated-to-consider-climate-change-risklawyer/356834.
“New Report: Private Equity, Labor's Retirement Capital, and the Climate Crisis.” Harry Bridges
Center for Labor Studies, August 2021. https://labor.washington.edu/news/2021-08/newreport-private-equity-labors-retirement-capital-and-climatecrisis?_ga=2.200460711.82290708.1643147955-1524849350.1642568360.
Pollard, Ben. “Are Pension Providers Guilty of Greenwashing?” The HR Director, June 9, 2021.
https://www.thehrdirector.com/features/csr/are-pension-providers-guilty-of-greenwashingor-do-climate-friendly-pensions-really-exist/.
“Science Based Targets Initiative Business Ambition for 1.5.” Science Based Targets initiative,
November 2021. https://sciencebasedtargets.org/resources/files/Business-Ambition- FAQ.pdf.
“Statement from Shift on OMERS’ Net-Zero by 2050 Commitment.” Shift. Shift - Protect Your
Pension
and the Planet, December 13, 2021.
https://www.shiftaction.ca/news/2021/11/25/statement-from-shift-on-omers-net-zero-by2050-commitment.
Tabuchi, Hiroko. “Private Equity Funds, Sensing Profit in Tumult, Are Propping up Oil.” The New
York Times. The New York Times, October 13, 2021.
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/10/13/climate/private-equity-funds-oil-gas-fossil- fuels.html.
Tyson, Alec, Brian Kennedy, and Cary Funk. “Gen Z, Millennials Stand out for Climate Change
Activism, Social Media Engagement with Issue.” Pew Research. Pew Research Center, May 26,
2021.
https://www.pewresearch.org/science/2021/05/26/gen-z-millennials-standout-for-climate-change-activism-social-media-engagement-with-issue/.
Vetter, David. “As Britain Votes, Investors Look to Renewables as the Best Bet.” Forbes. Forbes
Magazine, December 12, 2019. https://www.forbes.com/sites/davidrvetter/2019/12/12/asbritain-votes-investors-look-to-renewables-as-the-best-bet/?sh=77ca3d3fa142.
Wells, Victoria. “Posthaste: Baby Boomers Are Increasingly Worried about Their Finances Heading
into Retirement.” financialpost. Financial Post, October 25, 2021.
https://financialpost.com/executive/executive-summary/posthaste-baby-boomers-areincreasingly-worried-about-their-finances-heading-into-retirement.
“World Population.” Worldometer, January 2022. https://www.worldometers.info/worldpopulation/.